---
label:
title: The Age of Urban Visions
subtitle: From Global Cites to Civic Cities
short_title: Age of Urban Visions
object:
  - id:
contributor:
  - id: hmori
abstract:
type: essay
class:
weight: 999
slug:
---

### Hiroyuki Mori

## Cities and the Capitalist Economy

Human beings have formed and resided in cities since ancient times. Cities have been the "flower of civilization", and they have contained the cutting-edge social resources of the times and have become a driving force shaping the history of humankind.

Most cities were originally created based on political and religious powers, within which various social and economic activities were carried out and urban societies developed. Cities with a strong shade of "political city" and "religious city" can still be found all over the world.

Since modern times, the market economy itself has become the driving force for the formation and development of cities, now called "industrial cities" or "economic cities," in the place of politics and religion. In some cases, private industry grew spontaneously, and in others, the market economy led by politics had great power. Both types of city growth are due to the fact that the economy inherent in politics and society entered a path of constant expansion due to the development of capitalism. Capitalism is an economic system dominated by capital with the mission of eternal economic value accumulation, with entrepreneurs and workers placed under the development system of capitalism. Capitalism is destined for the pursuit of constant economic growth for society as a whole and cities have been the centers of capitalistic economic development. Currently, cities, developed by the power of this capitalistic economy, have become a base for capital accumulation, and land use and public policy have been used for the purpose of economic growth.

On the other hand, the accumulation of economic resources in the space of a city threatened the lives of residents in urban societies. Big companies and high-income earners occupied land in good condition, with infrastructure and other social and economic environments, which drove workers to poorer residential areas and suburbs. These workers were forced to live in poor housing and traffic conditions. The absence of public health and pollution control eroded their lives and health. Even the supply of communal conditions such as decent housing and water was so inadequate that cities were constantly afflicted with fear of infectious diseases and pollution. These issues emerged as new social problems called urban problems. Urban problems are the history behind the industrial city. While the driving force of urban growth of capital accumulation was actively driven under the market economy, the urban policy to deal with the social costs caused by it was poorly designed and implemented.

The appearance of the industrial city continued into the twentieth century. The shift of the industrial structure from light industry (e.g. textiles) to heavy industry (e.g. petrochemicals) led to the development of cities where environmentally destructive industries were concentrated. Environmental problems such as air pollution and water pollution were most damaging to biologically vulnerable populations such as the elderly and children and the socially vulnerable such as those with low-income. Cities were densely populated and needed social services, public facilities, and infrastructure for residents to live a decent life together.

However, under market-led socio-economic systems, public policies on economic growth were prioritized. The municipalities did not actively adopt urban policies from a paternalistic standpoint, so to solve their urban problems, social movements were needed. However, since people in weaker social positions tended to be the victims, the enhancement of social services and pollution control measures were always neglected.

The growth of the city has also had a great impact on the natural environment. Nature and agricultural land left in and around the city became the target of development due to their inferior economic value. When municipal power for city planning was weak, the city was developed in a chaotic manner, exposing its ugly appearance. Such development activities increased the administrative and financial burden on local governments and caused waste in public finance. The unplanned accumulation of business establishments and housing in the central area led to delays in the development of communal social conditions, leading to a shortage of public services such as schools, nurseries, water and sewage systems, and transportation. Residential areas built one after another in the suburbs were equipped with the necessary infrastructure and social services from scratch, and enormous transportation investments were made to connect them to the central area. Infrastructure development for disaster prevention also had to be improved in areas where the risk of disasters increased due to business-led land development by both the private and public sectors.

## Cities of the Twentieth Century---Development into Global Cities and Sustainable Cities

Nevertheless, the decades after World War II, the progress in urbanization meant that some of the fruits of high economic growth could be directed to public policies. The three conditions that formed the postwar welfare society of market economy, nation-state, and democracy all worked together. These conditions made it possible to balance urban economic growth and necessary urban policies in a relatively corresponding manner because economic growth increased the central government and municipalities' tax revenues and directed their fiscal resources to the urban policies necessary for citizens' lives. In short, within the subsequent socio-economic system, the market economy came under control.

However, cities still faced economic and social problems. Under capitalism, national and local governments had no choice but to adopt public policies premised on economic growth, in which effective urban policies still tended to constantly fall behind. Yet, the rise in basic human rights during this period advanced urban policy, but the change was short-lived.

Welfare states suffered from low economic growth and government budget deficits. As a response, so-called neoliberal policies emerged in search of solutions in the 1980s. Neoliberal economic thought is market fundamentalism, which seeks to entrust the socio-economic system to market mechanisms as much as possible. Social services and public works projects provided by the central and local governments to that date were marketized and commodified. Public sector functions were privatized and outsourced to the private sector. Deregulation in the public sector was also carried out to promote this trend, and the natural and social environment of urban and rural areas changed considerably. In the public sector, a type of organizational management that imitated business companies, called new public management, was introduced, and citizens were treated as customers/objects rather than sovereigns/subjects. Citizens who did not pay a fair amount of tax became bad customers of the public sector, and the safety net for vulnerable groups, who need the government most, became fragile.

The psycho-cultural impact of the spread of neoliberalism was the prevalence of extreme individualism and self-responsibility. Under the neoliberal philosophy, deregulation, privatization, and fiscal cutbacks have been promoted since the late 1980s, and the market economy has been separated from political administration and civil society resulting in its much superior position. Moreover, "world cities" or "global cities" such as New York, London, and Tokyo developed as new fields of urban research ({{< q-cite "Friedmann 1986" >}}; {{< q-cite "Sassen 1991" >}}). The industrial structure of cities has changed drastically, and with the progress of IT, a specialized field called the creative industry expanded significantly ({{< q-cite "Florida 2002" >}}). The development of these new, growing industries are a major source of economic growth in the twenty-first century, which, when coupled with deregulation of the labor market, has widened the wealth and income gap.

The gap has also sharpened social conflict in the city. The city center was redeveloped for new business activities and the wealthy's lifestyles. Global money, which has been constantly moving on a global scale, flowed into cities, and urban real estate became the target of global speculative investment. Gentrification expelled the citizens who lived in the city ({{< q-cite "Smith 1986" >}}). Now gentrification came to be called "urban enclosure" ({{< q-cite "Hodkinson 2012" >}}). As a result, disparities and conflicts have sharpened not only in the economy but also in living conditions among citizens. This change was the logical consequence of economic growth associated with the shrinking function of the public sector, and the dominance of the city by the market economy--- a characteristic of modern times---was advanced to the limit.

In addition, the global environment was at stake due to the expansion of human economic activity. International environmental problems such as global warming, ozone depletion, acid rain, and marine pollution became common issues for all humankind.

In such situations, deliberative discussions on how a city should be have been ongoing since the 1990s. Various opinions of alternative city images includes the effort of sustainable cities led by Europeans ({{< q-cite "Expert Group 1996" >}}). However, this was an urban movement that responded to the environmental crisis and tried to transform the economic society of the city into one that was environmentally friendly. The movement was strongly influenced by the idea of ​​sustainable development, which was the philosophy of the report *Our Common Future* submitted in 1987 by the United Nations World Commission on Environment and Development. Sustainable development is also the idea that placed the center of urban policy in the environment.

The sustainable cities movement during this period was based on the premise of economic growth and demanded that social costs such as environmental destruction and resource waste be internalized based on the fairness between the modern and future generations. In other words, sustainable cities had a relatively weak awareness of other social issues that prevailed in the modern generation.

## Spread of Socio-Pathology and Various Responses in Cities

From the late twentieth century, the world entered the era of neoliberalism in earnest, and its influence sharpened in cities. Economic globalization, which aimed at the free movement of capital, lowered national borders and caused nation-states to suffer from chronic fiscal pressure. It was the same in cities. This situation prompted a battle to attract capital by states and cities through deregulation and financial support such as tax reduction and subsidy for private companies.

This battle also meant that the people faced lower levels of wages and social services. Inequality and poverty among people widened, and discrimination against immigrants and some racial groups increased. In the discussion of sustainable cities, however, these conditions moved to the background. How to deal with the growing conflict between people due to disparities in cities has become a major social issue in cities.

In addition, as one aspect of globalization, cities around the world positioned tourism as an important economic strategy, which caused new social issues for cities. Middle-class and wealthy people from all over the world were rushing to cities in each country as tourists, and in order to absorb the demand, hotels and accommodation facilities for tourists were built in the cities. Traditional commercial stores shifted their main customers from residents to tourists. Land and housing prices skyrocketed, existing housing was transformed into facilities for tourists, and former residents were expelled. Chronic problems with infrastructure such as transportation congestion and poor waste treatment occurred, which worsened urban residents' daily lives and aggravated their dissatisfaction. Cities around the world began to seek ways to balance residents' lives with tourism.

In addition, many cities in developed countries entered the era of shrinking cities due to declining population and employment. The most typical situation is found in Japan, which is in the midst of the fastest population decline among all countries with a rapidly aging population in human history. In particular, Japan has a rigid immigration policy, severely restricting the acceptance of immigrants from abroad, so the problem of population decline has sharp characteristics ({{< q-cite "Hollander 2018" >}}). Due to the declining population in Japan, so-called "city like a sponge" with low population density has spread and the problem of vacant houses has become a national social issue. Declining population density worsens administrative and financial efficiency. Many cities in Japan aimed to be compact cities that concentrate people in the city center based on the 2014 amendment of the Act on Special Measures Concerning Urban Renaissance.

A compact city approach like Japan's resonates with gentrification because it concentrates administrative and financial resources in the city center. By deregulating land use for compact city formation, the compact city promotes the consolidation of public buildings such as schools and construct high-rise condominiums that can accommodate a large number of people. This approach also tends to deteriorate the community and the built environment. On the other hand, such incentives alone do not allow people to relocate, highlighting the difficulty of urban rightsizing policies.

Sustainable cities aimed for environment-friendly city development. In particular, the explosion of the Fukushima nuclear power plants caused by the Great East Japan Earthquake in March 2011 made the shift to renewable energy an international trend. The normalization of atypical weather has made it clear that climate change is an indispensable problem, and the number of cities that control greenhouse gases and save energy as much as possible has expanded. Smart cities, which seek to be energy-efficient through IT, are a manifestation of this idea. Smart cities are a form of city created by a new industrial structure, with an initiative to actively utilize the technology for urban development.

Distinguished efforts have also been expended to reduce dependence on the neoliberalist free market economy and to create an urban economic structure that is as independent and circular as possible. The idea of ​​the market economy is that the purchase of goods and services is to "buy good things as cheaply as possible." Based on the theory of comparative advantage in economics, it is rational to actively purchase cheap and good products and services from outside the city, and conversely sell products and services with comparative advantage in the city to the outside. However, the logic of comparative advantage presupposes normal and stable times. In the event of a disaster or other emergency, the socio-economic structure that presupposes such a division of labor exposes vulnerabilities due to long supply chains.

Therefore, the movement to create a resilient economic structure has intensified by increasing the economic circulation within the city and diversifying its industrial structure. It is also the construction of a community-based economy or social-solidary economy, which is a phenomenon promoted worldwide as "buy local" and "slow food" movements. It is a re-emergence of the idea that the existence of the community should be valued. In addition, it has begun to develop as "municipalism," extending into a movement that enhances the economic, political and administrative independence of a city as a whole ({{< q-cite "Baird 2019" >}}; {{< q-cite "Thomson 2020" >}}).

On the other hand, there are still strong movements to develop cities as tools for economic growth. For example, the World Bank seeks to create jobs and mitigate poverty by attracting and growing private firms and industries by developing more competitive cities ({{< q-cite "World Bank 2015" >}}). Cities have a mission to lead the economy and so pursuing cities' growth may not be a mistake. However, current cities with current urban problems have emerged as a result of tracking productivity and competitiveness. It is clear from the results of neoliberal urban policies that such competitive cities do not promise to solve the environmental issues and correct the widening disparities among populations. A city's economic growth should never be denied, but the sound development of a city cannot be expected with the single value of growth supremacy as it used to be.

Moreover, many recent studies have shown that economic growth and rising incomes are not directly related to people's well-being. The presence or absence of relatives / friends, health, freedom, environment, and so forth, do not have a strong correlation with income levels, and it is reaffirmed that increasing these universal values ​​is an important role of public policy ({{< q-cite "UN 2020" >}}). The recent disasters and the Covid-19 pandemic clearly show that people's well-being is, above all, based on safety and fearlessness. Cities are the most vulnerable to these emergencies, and promoting safe cities are emerging as a new policy agenda.

Such new findings give hope even in the age of shrinking cities. Even if the population and economy shrink, the well-being of the citizens may increase if a high-quality city can be created. To that end, cities that have been developed under the dominance of the market economy must be returned into the hands of politics and society, and new urban policy initiatives must be developed. The diverse urban practices that have spread in the twenty-first century are signs to explore the new policies.

## To a New City Vision

The situation outlined so far indicates that the present age is an era in which cities should develop anew. It is not a city that is strongly dependent on the single value of economic growth supremacy. The first priority is to develop cities so that people can jointly explore various ways of industry, society, culture, and environment and live happily together.

Notably, a city's values are diverse and its character will be different accordingly within a certain range of publicness. This means that we need to create a public discourse space within which people can bring in diverse public values ​​and discuss and consider them carefully.

On the other hand, cities have less territorial and human ties than rural areas, so individuals with a strong degree of isolation live in them. This characteristic indicates that the operation of such a public discourse space is challenging in cities. However, in the present age when neoliberalism has taken hold, regaining the public discourse space in a city is an indispensable practice for opening up a future vision since the distorted meritocracy as a consequence of market fundamentalism has spread the single value of economic efficiency and neutralized the society's necessary diverse public and moral discourses ({{< q-cite "Sandel 2020" >}}). Since cities with economic supremacy are incompatible with the reality of a society, people must carefully discuss, based on diverse public values, and develop a vision for cities with appropriate systems of politics, economy, and civil society.

Such a city vision is not created from a blank slate without reality. As development repeatedly experiences various trial and error, it will reflect on the practices of cities.

As cities have been led by economic systems, urban research has also become a central subject of social science. On the other hand, social sciences centered on economics have placed the perspective of analysis on the basis of atomic individuals and companies because they pursued their "scientificity." Individuals and companies are mainly regarded as actors that make up the market, and a model has been built in which the socio-economic system functions most efficiently when the government sector only responds appropriately to events that occur outside the market. The function of the civil society or community woven by soft and hard public spaces is neglected and viewed as an obstacle to an efficient socio-economic system.

On the other hand, Karl Polanyi has positioned the market economy, government, and community as the main actors that make up the socio-economic system, and therefore devised a more comprehensive and realistic model by integrating them ({{< q-cite "Polanyi 1944" >}}). This framework has developed in economic anthropology and institutional economics and differs from orthodox neoclassical economics. In addition, Polanyi positions human beings as depending on the environment of nature and ecosystems and living in institutionalized interactions with them. In that respect, his model depicts a socio-economic system in a holistic sense.

Polanyi\'s model is of the market economy as a system embedded in society, which he calls "modes of integration." When applied to cities, such a socio-economic integrated system is shown in the most concrete space there. Because the market economy has grown unbalanced with the government and communities, cities have become huge and have caused various social pathologies by breaking proper social integration.

So far, the government sector has tried to compromise the market economy with civil society and the natural environment by curbing it with increasing public spending and operating public regulations. However, while neoliberal globalization has become an extreme situation, putting most municipalities under fiscal stress. As a result, the social integration model, by increasing the role of government, has reached its limit. However, many municipalities are promoting marketization, including commercialization in the public sphere, with the aim of maintaining urban society through short-term economic growth. This condition has led to further imbalances between the market economy and political and civil society, as well as increasing disparities and instability in urban societies.

Under these circumstances, Matthew Thomson and others argue for the application of Polanyi\'s model to a new model of urban governance ({{< q-cite "Thomson 2020" >}}). Polanyi attributed the functioning of the economy to provisioning for peoples' needs or livelihood, with the three elements of reciprocity, redistribution, and exchange weaving through mutual processes. Reciprocity means gifting and mutual aid; redistribution means the collection and distribution of economic resources by power; and exchange means the movement of goods in the market. Reciprocity and redistribution belong to non-market areas. Reciprocity is the economic function of community like the management of commons, and redistribution is mainly under the jurisdiction of the government sector. The balance of these three elements varies by time and place and depends on broader social, cultural, political and economic contexts. Currently, market exchange is the dominant process in cities. Matthew Thomson and others insisted that modern urban economies should properly be reintegrated into Polanyi's three economic elements by municipalities using political, legal, and economic powers to create social justice and sustainable economic development. In that case, it is indispensable to make full use of fiscal tools and public regulation, create public value, and revitalize the community beyond the logic of capital.

The dominant actors in Polanyi\'s three economic elements have their own codes of conduct, as shown in Table 1.1. The codes of government and market are widely understood in theory and practice. However, the code of conduct for a community may differ depending on the understanding of the basis of the community's existence. For example, if community is equated with a mere collection of individuals as in mainstream social sciences, the idea of ​​inclusiveness does not appear as its code of conduct. However, the companionship implied in reciprocity is understood as human nature that transcends individual profit and loss calculation and coercion, and the code of conduct "inclusiveness" is nothing but the original function of community. In this sense, the community code of conduct can be defined as inclusiveness. As the expansion of the market economy and the cutbacks of the government have caused the decline of urban society, the fate of the city in the future depends on how to activate the community with this function.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Table 1.1 Logics of community, government, and market                           
  ------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------- ---------------------------
  　                                                      Economic role           Code of conduct

  Community                                               Reciprocity             Inclusiveness

  Government                                              Redistribution          Fairness

  Market                                                  Exchange                Efficiency

  Source: Author                                                                  
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In order for a community to have strong inclusiveness, it needs a social philosophy (communal value) on which it relies, for example, autonomy, mutual respect, symbiosis, solidarity, self-esteem, empowerment, and democracy. The holistic idea of ​​the socio-economic system that embodies these can be said to be public value.

{{< q-figure id="1.1" >}}

Municipalities should move toward sustainable cities in the future by actively creating socio-economic structures with this public value. For that purpose, it is indispensable that the policy of community strengthening by the municipalities, which has been weakly grounded in theory and practice, is fully developed.

Fig. 1.1 shows public policy implemented by municipalities in four quadrants of success / failure of community and market. In mainstream social science (especially economics) so far, only market successes and failures have been the basis of public policy. Public goods provision, redistribution, and economic stabilization have also been regarded as the role of public policy by the government, but none has a direct relationship with the community. Therefore, for example, public assistance lacking a sense of value as a community sometimes caused emotional conflict between residents. Future urban policies need to aim for the development of new cities by pursuing a model in which both the community and the market economy develop (the area depicted in the first quadrant of Fig. 1.1). For example, urban industrial policies that utilize labor resources and economic resources within a city are put in the first quadrant area. This kind of policy will give the residents involved a strong awareness of interdependence and strengthen social credibility and ties. This policy will also increase the community's trust in local governments and local businesses.

Fostering such a strong sense of trust in civil society is also important for the efforts of smart cities, which will have to progress rapidly in the future. Collecting and utilizing data on people\'s behavior won't be possible without their trust in information management and operation by governments and businesses. Smartening without such trust violates people's privacy and deprives them of their freedom. In this case, smart cities fall into a mere surveillance society based on data controlled by governments and businesses. Surveillance is never acceptable in a society based on modern democracy.

In this book, we will discuss a new way of urban governance from each field as a common platform.

## Book Structure

This book sets out to explore the future of city at the turning point of the times from the viewpoint of public value. To help navigate the rest of the book, we summarize the chapter contents.

Part I: The Age of City Regeneration (Chapters 1 and 2) gives an overview of the current situation in which the global market led by neoliberalism has arrived from the perspective of cities, and has reconstructed the foundation of public value, which is considered indispensable for future city regeneration. Public value is essential for the city of the community or civil society, which is the fellowship of the citizens. Public value is not a clear-cut idea, but it is highly important to notice that the constant orientation of citizens towards it will promote a permanent movement for the creation of a good city and society.

Part II: New Urban Visions, from this perspective, picks up typical directions for new urban development in the current cities. Urban restructuring employing rapidly advancing IT is an obvious initiative that has enabled the introduction of smart cities. Chapter 3 discusses the features of the smart city and suggests the direction to be taken for IT utilization in urban life.

Chapter 4 explores the typical situation of shrinking cities in Japan and discusses measures for their revitalization, based on the shared conditions of cities in developed countries where the populations are also declining. The chapter suggests that even if the city shrinks in size, this is not directly related to citizens' well-being and livability. Rather, the autonomous policy capacity of the municipalities and citizens is crucial to determining how to create a livable city in the face of population decline.

Chapter 5 discusses the challenges of restoring and retaining the quality of nature and ecosystems that have deteriorated due to urbanization. From a purely economic perspective, it is desirable for cities to concentrate the economic and social resources on growing their economies as much as possible. From this perspective, nature and ecosystems have long been treated as irrelevant to the market economy and evaluated only when valuable as "resources." Their intrinsic value ​​has been treated as ancillary. In this chapter, new city efforts to restore them are discussed.

Chapter 6 explores urban practices that are close to various vulnerable or marginalized people and support their self-esteem and social reinstatement. Neoliberalism has created a huge number of vulnerable groups in cities around the world. Financial disparity and discrimination based on a false meritocracy developed in the name of self-responsibility. However, our human conscience and innate community spirit prevents us from leaving such socially vulnerable people behind. Attempts are being made to walk hand-in-hand with them as citizens sharing the same city.

Chapter 7 discusses how to create an inclusive city that includes marginalized people. It can be said that this is the restoration of a true civil society, which is the key to true urban regeneration in the future. In this chapter, the practices and challenges of achieving this purpose are presented.

In the spirit of implementing the proposals in Chapter 7, the critical points for actually putting them into practice are specifically examined in Part III: Strategies for Inclusive City Making. Chapter 8 examines the reality of gentrification, which is a spatial expression of people's conflicts in cities, and also mentioned countermeasures. Gentrification is not a simple matter of people being segregated according to their income disparity, but steadily progresses through the effects of various economic and social factors such as tourism. This chapter discusses them from a comprehensive perspective.

Chapter 9 examines a practical strategy for regenerating the community. Community revitalization and strengthening includes a wide range of activities, from soft practices that directly restore people's connections to hard developments with built environments that naturally create networks of people. Without such integration, the community strategy cannot be fully functional.

From this point of view, Chapter 10 discusses the practical regeneration of the community centered on a concrete architectural space from the standpoint of the vulnerable. It is clear from the cases introduced in this chapter why the strategy for creating community from both software and hardware is important. Future community regeneration must be promoted by a strategy that integrates them both.

In Chapter 11, we discuss how to utilize IT, which will expand rapidly in the future, for urban planning that supports community regeneration and strengthening. This planning captures the ideal state of smart cities from the perspective of community strategy, and this chapter gives explanations about how important IT is for the development of cities that go beyond mere technological progress.

City visions and efforts in the above chapters encourage reflection on the state of the capitalist economy itself, which is the driving force behind the creation, development, and decline of cities. Urban theories and policies that do not fully reflect the capitalist nature of the economy are ineffective in today's era of social change. Part IV: Cities and Capitalism deals with this subject head-on. Chapter 12 presents a future city that incorporates all these points: the ideal form of a city will vary depending on its location. Even within each country or region, cities make a difference depending on how they utilize their autonomy. With that as a premise, we must develop the city as a spatial property common to all humankind.

Chapter 13, which is the book's conclusion, re-proposes the citizen-centric principle in placing the public value, which runs through this book, as the foundation of the future city as the basis of urban governance.